feat(docs): quickstart guide for record encryption on Kubernetes (#2518)
kroxylicious/kroxylicious: docs/record-encryption-quickstart/index.adoc

include::_assets/attributes.adoc[]

:context: record-encryption-quickstart
:quickstart: record-encryption

[id="quickstart-{context}"]
= Record Encryption Quickstart

[role="_abstract"]

You want an encryption-at-rest solution for data stored in your Apache Kafka?
This quickstart guide will show you how to do that on Kubernetes ... from scratch ... without external dependencies.
You'll be encrypting in a snap!

== Objectives

* Deploy a Kafka Cluster to a Kubernetes cluster.
* Deploy a Key Management Service (KMS) - we'll show you how with either HashiCorp Vault or AWS Localstack.
* Deploy Kroxylicious and configure it to proxy the cluster and apply Record Encryption.
* Produce/consume records to Kafka via the proxy demonstrating the transparent encryption.
* Verify that the records are encrypted on the broker.

WARNING: You *really don't* want to use this quickstart to deploy an environment that will be used in *production*.
The quickstart deliberately keeps things quick and simple... there's no authentication, no TLS, no redundancy... Development purposes only - please!.
Refer to the documentation for Kroxylicious, Strimzi and your KMS for production best practices.

> 

Author: I'm thinking about adding a diagram to show the components in context.  WDYT?

== Before you begin

You'll need the following a developer machine with the following software installed.

* https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start[Minikube]
* https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/[Helm]

== Start Minikube

Let's get the Kubernetes Cluster up and running.  Minikube defaults work just fine for this quickstart.

[source,shell]
----
minikube start
----

== Install the software

=== Install a KMS

Record Encryption needs somewhere to store its encryption keys, so you need to provide a KMS.
Use Helm to install either HashiCorp Vault or AWS LocalStack.

==== HashiCorp Vault

[source,shell]
----
helm repo add --force-update hashicorp https://helm.releases.hashicorp.com

> helm upgrade --install vault hashicorp/vault --namespace vault --create-namespace --version 0.30.1 --set server.dev.enabled=true,server.dev.devRootToken=myroottoken --wait

Author: I'm versioning everything.  We want the quickstart to be repeatable

----

You also need to enable the Transit Secrets Engine in Vault.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl exec -n vault statefulsets/vault -- vault secrets enable transit
----

==== AWS Local Stack

[source,shell]
----
helm repo add --force-update localstack-repo https://helm.localstack.cloud
helm upgrade --install localstack localstack-repo/localstack --namespace localstack --create-namespace --version 0.6.24 --set service.type=ClusterIP --wait
----

=== Install the Strimzi Operator

We are going to use Strimzi to deploy the Kafka Cluster that will be proxied.
Let's install Strimzi next:

[source,shell]
----

> helm repo add --force-update strimzi https://strimzi.io/charts/

Author: I've used Helm here only because we have to use Helm for Vault and Localstack.  We could switch to kubectl for Strimzi if people prefer.

Reviewer: If we didn't use `kubectl` later on anyway then I'd see the benefit (few prereqs => more likely readers will actually attempt following along). But since you _do_ use `kubectl`, and since Strimzi is most commonly installed using it, I wonder what the benefit to using `helm` here is? Is it simply that we don't need commands for waiting for the cluster to come up?

Author: I switch to kubectl, then switched back to Helm.  If we don't use Helm, then you need to process the yaml to change namespace references from my-project to `kafka`.  If I use Helm, that's taken care of for me which keeps the commands the user runs that little bit me simple.

unzip kroxylicious-operator.zip
kubectl apply -f install
kubectl wait --namespace kroxylicious-operator deployment/kroxylicious-operator --for=condition=Available=True --timeout=300s
----

== Deploy the Kafka Cluster

Now we need a Kafka Cluster.
This is the Kafka Cluster that will be proxied.
We'll just use one from the Strimzi Quickstart.
It will create a cluster in the `kafka` namespace

[source,shell]
----
kubectl apply -n kafka -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/refs/tags/0.47.0/examples/kafka/kafka-single-node.yaml
kubectl wait -n kafka kafka/my-cluster --for=condition=Ready --timeout=300s
----

We'll need the boostrap server address of the cluster later, so let's assign a variable containing it now.

[source,shell]
----
DIRECT_CLUSTER_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS=$(kubectl get -n kafka kafka my-cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.listeners[0].bootstrapServers}')
----

== Deploy the Proxy with Record Encryption

Next, we'll deploy a Kroxylicious proxy instance using the record encryption example included in the install zip you download above.

> It will create an instance of Kroxylicious that will proxy the kafka cluster you created a above, and configure it to

Reviewer: Lots of referencing things "above". I wonder if we should number the steps, so we can refer to them specifically?

> Next, we'll deploy a Kroxylicious proxy instance using the record encryption example included in the install zip you download above.
> 
> It will create an instance of Kroxylicious that will proxy the kafka cluster you created a above, and configure it to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll deploy a Kroxylicious proxy instance using the record encryption example included in the install zip you download above.

It will create an instance of Kroxylicious that will proxy the kafka cluster you created above, and configure it to
```

> apply the Record Encryption filter to encrypt as they are sent by producers and decrypt them as they get fetched by consumers.

Reviewer: "they" is not defined with the context of this sentence.

```suggestion
apply the Record Encryption filter to encrypt as records are sent by producers and decrypt them as records get fetched by consumers.
```

The proxy will be created the `my-proxy` namespace

[source,shell]
----
kubectl apply -f examples/record-encryption/
----

You need to update the example to know about your chosen KMS.

If you are using Vault:

[source,shell]
----

> kubectl patch -n my-proxy kafkaprotocolfilters.kroxylicious.io encryption --patch '{"spec":{"configTemplate":{"kms":"VaultKmsService","kmsConfig":{"vaultToken":{"password":"myroottoken"},"vaultTransitEngineUrl":"http://vault.vault.svc.cluster.local:8200/v1/transit"}, "selector" : "TemplateKekSelector", "selectorConfig" : {"template": "KEK_$(topicName)"}}}}' --type merge

Author: I'm planning to change the example to bake the TemplateKekSelector into the config.  We've only got one right now, so we may as well hardcoded in the example.

----

If you are using LocalStack:

[source,shell]
----
kubectl patch -n my-proxy kafkaprotocolfilters.kroxylicious.io encryption --patch '{"spec":{"configTemplate":{"kms":"AwsKmsService","kmsConfig":{"longTermCredentials":{"accessKeyId":{"password":"unused"},"secretAccessKey": {"password":"unused"}},"endpointUrl":"http://localstack.localstack.svc.cluster.local:4566/", "region" : "us-east-1"}, "selector" : "TemplateKekSelector", "selectorConfig" : {"template": "KEK_$(topicName)"}}}}' --type merge
----

[source,shell]
----
kubectl wait -n my-proxy kafkaproxy/simple --for=condition=Ready=True --timeout=300s
----

Let's wait for the proxy virtual cluster to be ready for connections, and then assign a variable containing the address.
We'll use this later when to produce and consumer records through the proxy.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl wait -n my-proxy virtualkafkacluster my-cluster --for=jsonpath='{.status.ingresses[0].bootstrapServer}'

> PROXIED_CLUSTER_BOOTSTRAP_SERVER=$(oc get -n my-proxy virtualkafkacluster my-cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.ingresses[0].bootstrapServer}')

Reviewer: `oc` -> `kubectl`

----

== Create an encryption key in the KMS

Record Encryption needs an encryption key to use when encrypting the records produced to the topic.
Let's create an encryption key in our KMS now.

The filter is configured to expect a key to exist in the KMS with the name `KEK_<topic name>`.
We are going to be using a topic called `trades` so we will create a key that can be referred to using the name `KEK_trades`.

If you are using Vault:

[source,shell]
----
kubectl exec -n vault statefulsets/vault -- vault write -f transit/keys/KEK_trades
----

If you are using LocalStack, you need to create a key and an alias to that key.

[source,shell]
----
KEY_ID=$(kubectl -n localstack exec deployments/localstack --  awslocal kms create-key --query KeyMetadata.KeyId --output text)
kubectl -n localstack exec deployments/localstack -- awslocal kms create-alias --alias-name alias/KEK_trades --target-key-id ${KEY_ID}
----

== Produce some messages

Now let's use Kafka's console producer CLI to send a few records to a topic called `trades`.
The Record Encryption filter will encrypt the records before they reach broker, but this is completely transparent to the console producer.

> Ignore the warning about the UNKNOWN_TOPIC_OR_PARTITION, the topic will be created automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

NOTE: You can safely ignore the warning about the UNKNOWN_TOPIC_OR_PARTITION, the topic will be created automatically.
```

[source,shell]
----
echo 'IBM:100\nAPPLE:99' | kubectl run -n my-proxy -qi proxy-producer --image=quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.47.0-kafka-4.0.0 --rm=true --restart=Never -- ./bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --bootstrap-server ${PROXIED_CLUSTER_BOOTSTRAP_SERVER} --topic trades
----

== Consume the messages

Now let's use Kafka's console consumer to fetch the records.
You'll see the two records we sent above.
The Record Encryption filter will decrypt the records before they reach consumer, but this is completely transparent to the console consumer.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl run -n my-proxy -qi proxy-consumer --image=quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.47.0-kafka-4.0.0 --rm=true --restart=Never -- ./bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh  --bootstrap-server ${PROXIED_CLUSTER_BOOTSTRAP_SERVER} --topic trades --from-beginning --timeout-ms 10000
----

== Verify that the records are encrypted on the broker

> You want to see that the records are truly encrypted on the broker, right.  Let's use the console consumer again,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consuming the same records we wrote is a bit underwhelming! 
And, in fact, it's what we'd expect to see with a vanilla, unproxied, Kafka cluster.
So how do we know the records really encrypted on the broker?  
Let's use the console consumer again,
```

but this time we'll consume straight from the Kafka cluster, bypassing the proxy.
We'll get back the records, but they'll contain ciphertext, rather than the plaintext.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl run -n kafka -qi cluster-consumer --image=quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.47.0-kafka-4.0.0 --rm=true --restart=Never -- ./bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh  --bootstrap-server ${DIRECT_CLUSTER_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS} --topic trades --from-beginning --timeout-ms 10000
----

= Cleaning up

To clean up, remove the proxy and the kafka cluster

[source,shell]
----
kubectl delete -f examples/record-encryption/
kubectl delete -n kafka -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/refs/tags/0.47.0/examples/kafka/kafka-single-node.yaml
----

Remove the Kroxylicious Operator.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl delete -f install
----

Use Helm to uninstall the remaining operators:

[source,shell]
----
helm uninstall -n kafka strimzi-operator --ignore-not-found
helm uninstall -n localstack localstack --ignore-not-found
helm uninstall -n vault vault --ignore-not-found
----

= What next?

> Learn more about Record Encryption by referring to the the document.

Reviewer: typo: [`the the`](https://open.spotify.com/track/3zf2eLN9Yf8ayZO5cn4Xh5?si=437f0997a2434892)

----

[#install_the_operator]
=== Install the Kroxylicious Operator

First, create a temporary directory for some working files.  We use a directory called `ko-install-nnnnn` beneath `/tmp`, but you can use any name and location you like.

[source,terminal]
----
$ QUICKSTART_DIR=/tmp/ko-install-${RANDOM}
$ mkdir ${QUICKSTART_DIR}
$ cd ${QUICKSTART_DIR}
----

Now let's download and unpack the Kroxylicious Operator

[source,terminal,subs="attributes"]
----
$ curl --fail --location --silent {OperatorAssetZipLink} --output kroxylicious-operator.zip
$ unzip -q kroxylicious-operator.zip
----

And install the Kroxylicious Operator

[source,terminal]
----
$ kubectl apply -f install
$ kubectl wait --namespace kroxylicious-operator deployment/kroxylicious-operator --for=condition=Available=True --timeout=300s
----

[#deploy_the_cluster]
== Deploy the Kafka Cluster

Now we need a Kafka Cluster.
This is the Kafka Cluster that will be proxied.
We'll just use one from the Strimzi Quickstart.
It will create a cluster in the `kafka` namespace.

[source,terminal,subs="attributes"]
----

> $ kubectl apply -n kafka -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/refs/tags/{strimzi-version}/examples/kafka/kafka-single-node.yaml

Reviewer 2: question more than suggestion. We have defined a bunch of variables for github URLs for kroxylicious but have fully embedded it for the Strimzi download. Is there an advantage to either approach?

Author: My motivation for  using `{OperatorAssetZipLink}  was so that when automatically testing the quickstart against PR, substitute the Zip artefact resulting from the build (with a `file:` url) so that the quickstart will be tested against the to-be code.

Reviewer 3: >  Is there an advantage to either approach?

I value the DRY type composition of the project github links.
```
:OperatorAssetZipLink: {github-release-downloads}/{OperatorAssetZipFileName}
```
It gives us a central place to update if we ever wanted to change the release asset locations.

External ones like the strimzi link feel like we can be a bit looser. For these ones I'd wait for multiple usages across guides before pulling them out into attributes.

$ kubectl wait -n kafka kafka/my-cluster --for=condition=Ready --timeout=300s
----

We'll need the boostrap server address of the kafka cluster later, so let's assign a variable containing it now.

[source,terminal]
----
$ DIRECT_CLUSTER_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS=$(kubectl get -n kafka kafka my-cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.listeners[0].bootstrapServers}')
----

[#deploy_the_proxy]
== Deploy the Proxy with Record Encryption

Next, we'll deploy a Kroxylicious proxy instance using the record encryption example included in the install zip you downloaded when you <<install_the_operator,installed the operator>>

It will create an instance of Kroxylicious that will proxy the kafka cluster you <<deploy_the_cluster,created above>>.
It will configure it to use the Record Encryption filter to encrypt as records are sent by producers and decrypt them as records get fetched by consumers.
The proxy will be created the `my-proxy` namespace

[source,terminal]
----
$ kubectl apply -f examples/record-encryption/
----

> You need to update the example to know about your chosen KMS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need to update the example to find keys in your chosen KMS.
```
